Market Returns Adjusted for Inflation
=====================================

It is a maxim of investing that the stock market is risky but if you leave your 
money in over the long run it reliably provides the excellent returns.  `Visual 
Capitalist 
<https://advisor.visualcapitalist.com/historical-stock-market-returns>`_ pegs 
the rate of return at over 8% when averaged over 200 years.  Such returns allow 
investors to beat inflation and build a nest egg if they keep their money in the 
market for decades.  But they leave one question unanswered: what are the 
expected returns adjusted for inflation?  This document attempts to get a handle 
on that.

First, lets examine the Dow Jones Industrial Average over time.

.. image:: dow_usd.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

Over the last two hundred years the growth rate has averged about 3.6%, but 
notice that the slope seems to change right around 1930, the date of the Great 
Depression.  Before the depression the slope was lower and the after the 
depression the slope increases.  This occurred because of changes in policy at 
that time increased the amount of inflation in monetary supply.

When most people want to know the amount of inflation, they look up the CPI or 
Consumer Price Index. However, this is not a suitable measure of inflation when 
discussing investments.  The CPI measures the grown in the prices of essentials 
that are needed by the average person in their daily life, things like the cost 
of food and clothing. What we are interested in is inflation in the price of 
assets, after all one invests in assets like houses or companies, not in 
essentials like bread or socks.  The inflation in assets can be much different 
than the inflation measured by the CPI.

The best way to compensate for inflation in assets is to normalize the price of 
the asset to the price of gold. Gold is an asset and it is used primarily as 
a long term store of value as a hedge against inflation.

.. image:: gold_usd.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

As you can see the price of gold was relatively constant until the Great 
Depression, at which point it started to climb as the gold standard began to 
falter. With the dollar losing its anchor it begins to inflate in a substantial 
way.  I assume that the value of gold has remained relatively constant over time 
as it has for millennia and instead the increasing price of gold over time is 
due to the decrease in purchasing power of the dollar.

Now, if the Dow is normalized to the price of gold we can see that true return 
of the Dow over the last 200 years:

.. image:: dow_auoz.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

Notice that the change is slope is gone, which supports the idea that it was due 
to inflation and that the effect of inflation can be removed by normalizing to 
the price of gold.  Now that the true rate of return is determined to be 2%, 
which seems to be quite modest, especially when the risk and volatility of the 
market is considered.

Now it is important to remember that the Dow is not the market, it is just one 
segment of the market. It is convenient to use because it has been around for 
a long time. In recent years more of the growth of the market is to be found in 
other averages, such as the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq.

Consider the S&P 500.

.. image:: sp500_usd.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

In this case the apparent return is 6.8%. However, when inflation is removed ...

.. image:: sp500_auoz.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

the true return is found to be an even more modest 1.6%.

Finally, consider the Nasdaq.

.. image:: nasdaq_usd.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

Here the return in terms of dollars is found to be 10.2%.

.. image:: nasdaq_auoz.svg
    :width: 100%
    :align: center

With inflation removed, the return becomes 5%.

What this shows is that one must really consider inflation when looking at 
long-term expected returns in the market.  The true returns are considerably 
less that what are generally advertized, which of course if very important to 
understand when planning for the long term.
